boards: arm: xilinx: Add initial KV260 R5 board support (#54916)
zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr: boards/arm/xilinx_kv260_r5/doc/index.rst

Linux kernel (Versions 5.15 from Xilinx and 6.2 are supported). Users may refer the
Xilinx reference Petalinux image as starting point of getting a remoteproc supported feature
from here:

https://xilinx-wiki.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/A/pages/1641152513/Kria+K26+SOM#PetaLinux

In the link above,there are also, some instructions on how to prepare a SD-Card to run this image
at the target board.

After getting the image running at the target board, build the Zephyr application
for example, the hello world sample:

.. zephyr-app-commands::
   :zephyr-app: samples/hello_world
   :host-os: unix
   :board: xilinx_kv260_r5
   :goals: build

After a successful build, deploy the generated .elf file to the
target board. On the target board's terminal, load the zephyr file
to the desired RPU:

.. code-block:: console

        $ echo zephyr > /sys/class/remoteproc/remoteproc0/firmware
        $ echo start > /sys/class/remoteproc/remoteproc0/state

Open another terminal and connect to the UART1 on the host machine,
then you might able to see the Zephyr application running:

.. code-block:: console

        *** Booting Zephyr OS build v2.2.0  ***

>         Hello World xilinx_kv260_r5!

Author: Hmm this PR is open for a while, in that time it was tested under v2.2

.. _xilinx_kv260_starter_kit_r5:

Xilinx KV260 Development Board RPU Cortex-R5
############################################

Overview
********
This configuration provides support for the RPU, real-time processing unit on Xilinx
KV260 development board, it can operate as following:

> 

Reviewer: Add link to a good page for kv260 info in here somewhere.
Match what is done for other boards.

Reviewer: As @microbuilder pointed out on our call.  The page should also have a picture of the board to match what is normally done for other boards.

* Or as a single dual lock step unit with double the TCM size.

This processing unit is based on an ARM Cortex-R5 CPU, it also enables the following devices:

* ARM PL-390 Generic Interrupt Controller
* Xilinx Zynq TTC (Cadence TTC)
* Xilinx Zynq UART

Hardware
********
Supported Features
==================

The following hardware features are supported:

+--------------+------------+----------------------+
| Interface    | Controller | Driver/Component     |
+==============+============+======================+
| GIC          | on-chip    | generic interrupt    |
|              |            | controller           |
+--------------+------------+----------------------+
| TTC          | on-chip    | system timer         |
+--------------+------------+----------------------+
| UART         | on-chip    | serial port          |
+--------------+------------+----------------------+

The kernel currently does not support other hardware features on this platform.

Devices
========
System Timer
------------

This board configuration uses a system timer tick frequency of 1000 Hz.

Serial Port
-----------

This board configuration uses a single serial communication channel with the

> on-chip UART1.

Author: UART1 currently is the instance of the peripheral that appears in the DTS file, in order this is the second one, the first one would be the UART0

> 

Author: Hmm well actually the application is linked and is loaded to the sram0 area, when the DTS is parsed a DT_SRAM_ symbol is generated and consumed by the linker, and if the board does not support XIP execution, all the application code plus data is placed at sram0 which seems to be an DDR area.  

The OCM area is defined on the linker as well, and consumes the ocm0 area from DTS file, but by default nothing is placed there unless the code explicitly tells that (placement via attributes for example).

I will put a section explaining that .

Known Problems or Limitations
==============================

The following platform features are unsupported:

* Dual-redundant Core Lock-step (DCLS) execution is not supported yet.
* Only the first core of the R5 subsystem is supported.
* Xilinx Zynq TTC driver does not support tickless mode operation.

Programming and Debugging
*************************

Currently the best way to run this sample is by loading it through remoteproc
from the APU, running Linux, to the RPU, assuming the target board has a compatible
Linux kernel (Versions 5.15 from Xilinx and 6.2 are supported). Users can make use of
Xilinx's pre-built Petalinux reference images as a starting point to enable
remoteproc support, as described here:

https://xilinx-wiki.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/A/pages/1641152513/Kria+K26+SOM#PetaLinux

The above link includes instructions on how to prepare a SD-Card to run this image on
the target board.

After getting the Linux image running on the target board, build a Zephyr application,
such as the hello world sample shown below:

.. zephyr-app-commands::
   :zephyr-app: samples/hello_world
   :host-os: unix
   :board: xilinx_kv260_r5
   :goals: build

> After a successful build, deploy the generated .elf file to the target board.
> Using the target board's terminal, run the zephyr firmware on the desired RPU
> via remoteproc with:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After a successful build, deploy the generated .elf file to the target board.
Using the Linux shell on the target board (available using one of the UART
blocks exposed via the on-board FTDI chip), run the zephyr firmware on
the desired RPU via remoteproc with:
```

.. code-block:: console

>         $ echo zephyr > /sys/class/remoteproc/remoteproc0/firmware

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't this be `zephyr.elf`?

        $ echo start > /sys/class/remoteproc/remoteproc0/state

> With another terminal connected to UART1 on the host machine,
> you should see the Zephyr application running:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With another terminal connected to UART1 on the host machine
(available via one of the tty ports with the on-board FTDI chip),
you should see the Zephyr application running:
```

* Dual-redundant Core Lock-step (DCLS) execution is not supported yet.
* Only the first core of the R5 subsystem is supported.
* Xilinx Zynq TTC driver does not support tickless mode operation.
* The Cortex-R5 and the Cortex-A53 shares the same UART controller, more details below.

Programming and Debugging
*************************

Currently the best way to run this sample is by loading it through remoteproc
from the APU, running Linux, to the RPU, assuming the target board has a compatible
Linux kernel (Versions 5.15 from Xilinx, 6.0 and 6.2 are supported). Users can make use of
Xilinx's pre-built Petalinux reference images as a starting point to enable
remoteproc support, as described here:

https://xilinx-wiki.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/A/pages/1641152513/Kria+K26+SOM#PetaLinux

The above link includes instructions on how to prepare a SD-Card to run this image on
the target board.

After getting the Linux image running on the target board, build a Zephyr application,
such as the hello world sample shown below:

.. zephyr-app-commands::
   :zephyr-app: samples/hello_world
   :host-os: unix
   :board: xilinx_kv260_r5
   :goals: build

> Due to a hardware limitation, both Linux and the Zephyr share the same
> UART controller, then when the Zephyr application gets launched it will takeover the
> console from Linux, to overcome this limitation the best way is to connect to the board
> using the ``ssh`` over the network, then connect the board and the host computer in the
> same network, assuming the usage of the reference image from Xilinx open a terminal then:

Reviewer 2: I already approved, so more of a nit for clarity, but this might be easier to follow:

```suggestion
Due to a hardware limitation, both Linux and Zephyr share the same UART
controller, meaning when the Zephyr application is started it will takeover the
console from Linux.

To avoid this limitation when accessing the Linux shell, the best approach is to
connect to the board using ``ssh`` over the network (not using the FTDI
USB interface on the board), with the dev board and the host computer
connected to the same network. 

Assuming you are using the default ``petalinux`` user from the Xilinx
reference image , open a terminal on the host machine and ssh into the
development board with the boards IP address (found via ``ifconfig``):
```

| GIC          | on-chip    | generic interrupt    |
|              |            | controller           |
+--------------+------------+----------------------+
| TTC          | on-chip    | system timer         |
+--------------+------------+----------------------+
| UART         | on-chip    | serial port          |
+--------------+------------+----------------------+

The kernel currently does not support other hardware features on this platform.

Devices
========
System Timer
------------

This board configuration uses a system timer tick frequency of 1000 Hz.

Serial Port
-----------

This board configuration uses a single serial communication channel with the
on-chip UART1.

Known Problems or Limitations
==============================

The following platform features are unsupported:

* Dual-redundant Core Lock-step (DCLS) execution is not supported yet.
* Xilinx Zynq TTC driver does not support tickless mode operation.

Programming and Debugging
*************************
Currently the best way to run this sample is by loading it through remoteproc
from APU which runs Linux to the RPU, so assuming the target board has a compatible

> Linux kernel (Versions 5.15 from Xilinx abd 6.2 are supported), first build the app.

Reviewer 2: Can you add a link to somewhere users can find instructions on downloading/building and flashing the SD card (etc.) with an appropriate Linux image, to at least point them in the right direction?

Use this configuration to run basic Zephyr applications and kernel,
for example, with the hello world sample:

.. zephyr-app-commands::
   :zephyr-app: samples/hello_world
   :host-os: unix
   :board: xilinx_kv260_r5
   :goals: build

> After a succesfull building, deploy the .elf file generated to the
> target board. On the target board terminal load the zephyr file
> to the desired RPU:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After a succesful build, deploy the .elf file generated to the
target board. On the target board terminal load the zephyr file
to the desired RPU:
```
